'\" t
.\" Man page for `aura`
.\" Written by Colin Woodbury <colin@fosskers.ca>
.
.TH aura 8 "2021 September" "Aura" "Aura Manual"
.
.de SAMPLE      \" Indented example - on its own paragraph.
.  P
.  RS
.  EX
..
.de ESAMPLE     \" End of Indented example.
.  EE
.  RE
..
.de RSAMPLE     \" Relative sample - even more indented example.
.  RS
.  SAMPLE
..
.de ERSAMPLE    \" End of Relative sample.
.  ESAMPLE
.  RE
..
.
.ds ellipsis \&.\|.\|.\&
.\" Format repeatable parameter (1 or more) with ellipsis.
.ds multi                 \fI\\$1\fP\fR\\ \\*[ellipsis]\fP
.\" Format optional repeatable parameter (0 or more)
.\" with ellipsis and square brackets.
.ds multi-optional \fR[\fP\fI\\$1\fP\fR\\ \\*[ellipsis]]\fP
.ds packages          \\*[multi          packages]
.ds packages-optional \\*[multi-optional packages]
.
.SH NAME
.
aura \- package manager utility and AUR helper
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY aura
.I OPERATION
\*[multi-optional OPTIONS]
\*[multi-optional targets]
.YS
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
.B aura
is a secure, multilingual package manager for Arch Linux written in Haskell.
.
It connects to both the official Arch repositories and to the
Arch User Repositories (AUR),
allowing easy control of all packages on an Arch system.
.
Aura allows
.I all
pacman operations and provides
.I new
custom ones for dealing with AUR packages.
.
.SH OPERATIONS
.
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-aursync " \*[packages-optional]"
.
Perform actions involving the
.BR A UR.
.
Default action installs packages from the AUR.
.
.IP
During building, makepkg output is
.I not
shown by default.
.
After building, the built
.I *.pkg.tar.xz
file is moved to the package cache and installed from there.
.
This allows for easy AUR package downgrading.
.
.TP
.BR -B ", " \-\-save
.
Manage the saving and restoring of the global package state.
.
Default action stores a record of all currently installed packages and their
versions.
.
.TP
.BR -C ", " \-\-downgrade " \*[packages-optional]"
.
Perform actions involving the package
.BR C ache.
.
Default action downgrades specified
.IR packages .
.
.IP
This process is interactive, allowing the user to choose from any previous
version they have available in the package cache.
.
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-viewlog
.
Perform actions involving the pacman
.BR L ogfile.
.
Default action opens the log for read-only viewing.
.
.TP
.BR \-O ", " \-\-orphans " \*[packages-optional]"
.
Perform actions involving
.BR O rphan
packages.
.
Default action is to list the current orphans.
.
.IP
Orphan packages are packages installed as dependencies,
but are no longer required by any other package.
.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-analysis
.
Perform security analysis of a
.BR P KGBUILD.
.
Default action reads PKGBUILD from stdin.
.
.IP
Useful for package maintainers and sysadmins to verify the safety of the
PKGBUILD files that they write.
.
To test any package on the AUR, try the following:
.
.RSAMPLE
.BI "aura -Ap " "package" " | aura -P"
.ERSAMPLE
.
.SH AUR SYNC OPTIONS (\fR\-A\fP)
.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-delmakedeps
.
Uninstalls build dependencies that are no longer required after installing the
main package.
.
This prevents the creation of orphan packages.
.
Also note that while the package itself will be uninstalled,
its package file will remain in the cache.
.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-clean
.
After a package's tarball has been built and copied to the package cache,
delete its build directory immediately.
.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-deps " \*[packages]"
.
View all dependencies of
.IR packages .
.
This process is recursive for AUR packages,
so all dependencies of dependencies (and so on) will also be shown.
.
This can aid the pre-install package research process.
.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-info " \*[packages]"
.
View information about AUR
.IR packages .
.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-diff
.
Show PKGBUILD diffs.
.
When upgrading, using this option will compare the most and second-most recent
PKGBUILDs and output changes in colour.
.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pkgbuild " \*[packages]"
.
View PKGBUILDs of AUR
.IR packages .
.
Use this before installing new packages to confirm that the build scripts
aren't doing anything fishy.
.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
.
Display less information about certain
.B \-A
operations
(this is useful when processing Aura's output in a script).
.
In particular, search and view dependencies will only show uncoloured package
names.
.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-search " \*[multi word]"
.
Search AUR for packages containing
.IR word s
(not regex) in their names or descriptions.
.
Multiple terms will narrow down the search.
.
Results are sorted by votes.
.
Suboptions:
.
.RS
.
.  TP
.  B \-\-abc
.
Sorts results alphabetically.
.
.  TP
.  BR \-\-head [ =\fIN\fR ]
.
Only show the first
.I N
results.
.I N
defaults to 10.
.
.  TP
.  BR \-\-tail [ =\fIN\fR ]
.
Only show the last
.I N
results.
.I N
defaults to 10.
.
.  TP
.  BR \-r ", " \-\-both
.
Show results from the official repos as well.
.
.RE
.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-sysupgrade
.
Upgrade all installed AUR packages.
.B -Au
is like
.B -Su
but for AUR packages.
.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-downloadonly " \*[packages]"
.
Retrieve AUR
.I packages
source tarballs,
but do not build/install/upgrade anything.
.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-unsuppress
.
Unsuppress
.BR makepkg (8)
output during building.
.
By default this output is suppressed for a more silent install.
.
Note that when this option isn't used,
.B makepkg
output is actually collected and printed if any errors occur.
.
.TP
.B \-\-json \*[packages]
.
Query the AUR RPC for
.I packages
info as raw JSON.
.
Good for debugging.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-build " path"
.
Specify build
.I path
when building AUR packages.
.
Only the
.I full
path of a pre-existing directory can be used.
.
Example:
.
.RSAMPLE
aura -A foo --build=/full/path/to/build/location/
.ERSAMPLE
.
.TP
.BI \-\-builduser " user"
.
Specify the
.I user
to build packages as.
.
This can be useful when logged in as root and a build user is available.
.
.TP
.B \-\-devel
.
When ran with
.BR \-Au ,
adds all development packages to the queue of packages to upgrade.
.
Devel packages are those pulled directly from online repositories,
via git / mercurial / etc.
.
.TP
.B \-\-dryrun
.
When ran with
.BR \-A " or " \-Au ,
update checks,
PKGBUILD diffs,
and dependency checks will be performed,
but nothing will be built.
.
Also usable with
.BR \-M .
.
.TP
.B \-\-force
.
Always (re)build the specified packages.
.
Usually Aura will not rebuild packages whose versions are already available in
the local package cache.
.
.TP
.B \-\-hotedit
.
Before building, prompt the user if they wish to view/edit the
.IR PKGBUILD ,
as well as any
.IR .install " or " .patch
files.
.
However, research into packages (and by extension, their PKGBUILDs) should be
done by the user before any building occurs.
.
Please use
.BR \-Ap " and " \-Ad
for this,
as they will be much faster at presenting information than searching the AUR
website manually.
.
Note that, since aura is run through sudo,
your local value of
.RB $ EDITOR
may not be preserved.
.
Run as
\(lqsudo
.B \-E
aura -A --hotedit \*[ellipsis]\(rq
to preserve your environment.
.
To always allow environment variables to be passed,
have a look at the
.IR env_reset " and " env_keep
options in
.BR sudoers (5).
.
.TP
.B \-\-skipdepcheck
.
Perform no dependency solving.
.
Consider this when using
.B \-\-hotedit
to avoid building annoying dependencies that aren't necessary for your special
use-case.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-vcspath " path"
.
Save the cloned sources of VCS packages (i.e.\& those that end in
.IR *-git ,
etc.) in the given
.IR path ,
instead of the default
.IR /var/cache/aura/vcs/ .
.
.SH GLOBAL PACKAGE STATE OPTIONS (\fR\-B\fP)
.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-clean \c
.I " states-to-retain
.
Retains a given number of the most recently saved package states and removes the
rest.
.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-restore
.
Restores a record kept with
.BR \-B .
.
Attempts to downgrade any packages that were upgraded since the chosen save.
.
Will remove any that weren't installed at the time.
.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
.
Show all saved package state filenames.
.
.SH DOWNGRADE OPTIONS (\fR\-C\fP)
.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-backup \c
.I " path
.
Backup the package cache to a given directory.
.
The given directory must already exist.
.
During copying, progress will be shown.
.
If the copy takes too long,
you may want to reduce the number of older versions of each package by using
.BR \-Cc .
.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-clean \c
.I " versions-to-retain
.
Retains a given number of package versions for each package,
and deletes the rest from the package cache.
.
Count is made from the most recent version, so using:
.
.RSAMPLE
aura -Cc 3
.ERSAMPLE
.
.IP
would save the three most recent versions of each package file.
.
Giving the number 0 as an argument is identical to
.BR \-Scc .
.
.TP
.B \-\-notsaved
.
Remove only those package files which are not saved in a package record (a la
.BR \-B ).
.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-search \c
.I " regex
.
Search the package cache via a
.IR regex .
.
Any package name that matches the regex will be output as-is.
.
.SH LOGFILE OPTIONS (\fR\-L\fP)
.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-info " \*[packages]"
.
Displays install/upgrade history for given
.IR packages .
.
Under the \(lqRecent Actions\(rq section,
only the last five entries will be displayed.
.
If there are less than five actions ever performed with the package,
what is available will be printed.
.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-search \c
.I " regex
.
Search the pacman log file via a
.IR regex .
.
Useful for singling out any and all actions performed on a package.
.
.SH ORPHAN PACKAGE OPTIONS (\fR\-O\fP)
.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-adopt " \*[packages]"
.
Mark
.I packages
as being explicitly installed (i.e.\& it's not a dependency).
.
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-abandon
.
Uninstall all orphan packages.
.
.SH ANALYSIS OPTIONS (\fR\-P\fP)
.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file \c
.I " path
.
Analyse a PKGBUILD at the specified
.IR path .
.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-dir \c
.I " path
.
Analyse a
.IR path /PKGBUILD
found in the specified directory.
.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-audit
.
Analyse the PKGBUILDs of all locally installed AUR packages.
.
.SH PACMAN / AURA DUAL FUNCTIONALITY OPTIONS
.
.TP
.B \-\-noconfirm
.
Never ask for any Aura or Pacman confirmation.
.
Any time a prompt would appear,
say before building or installation,
it is assumed the user answered in whatever way would progress the program.
.
.TP
.B \-\-needed
.
Don't rebuild/reinstall packages that are already up to date.
.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
.
View some handy debugging information.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-color " when"
.
Specify when to enable colouring.
.
Without this flag, both Aura and Pacman will attempt to colour text if the
terminal allows it.
.
Otherwise, you can pass
.BR always " or " never
to be specific about your wants.
.
.TP
.BI \-\-overwrite " glob"
.
If there are file conflicts during installation,
overwrite conflicting files that match the given
.I glob
pattern.
.
.SH EXPOSED MAKEPKG OPTIONS
.
.TP
.B \-\-ignorearch
.
Ignores processor architecture when building packages.
.
.TP
.B \-\-allsource
.
Creates a
.I .src
file containing all the downloaded sources (code, etc.\&)
and stores it at
.IR /var/cache/aura/src/ .
.
To change the location where sources are stored,
use the
.B \-\-allsourcepath
flag on command line or via
.BR aura.conf (5).
.
.TP
.B \-\-skipinteg
.
Skip package source integrity checks (hash sums).
.
.TP
.B \-\-skippgpcheck
.
Skip all PGP checks.
.
.SH LANGUAGE OPTIONS
.
Aura is available in multiple languages.
.
As options, they can be used with either their English names or their real
names written in their native characters.
.
The available languages are, in option form:
.
.TS \" Tab-separated
l l.
\fB\-\-english\fP	(default)
\fB\-\-japanese\fP	\fB\-\-日本語\fP
\fB\-\-polish\fP	\fB\-\-polski\fP
\fB\-\-croatian\fP	\fB\-\-hrvatski\fP
\fB\-\-swedish\fP	\fB\-\-svenska\fP
\fB\-\-german\fP	\fB\-\-deutsch\fP
\fB\-\-spanish\fP	\fB\-\-español\fP
\fB\-\-portuguese\fP	\fB\-\-português\fP
\fB\-\-french\fP	\fB\-\-français\fP
\fB\-\-russian\fP	\fB\-\-русский\fP
\fB\-\-italian\fP	\fB\-\-italiano\fP
\fB\-\-serbian\fP	\fB\-\-српски\fP
\fB\-\-norwegian\fP	\fB\-\-norsk\fP
\fB\-\-indonesian\fP
\fB\-\-chinese\fP	\fB\-\-中文\fP
\fB\-\-esperanto\fP
\fB\-\-dutch\fP	\fB\-\-nederlands\fP
.TE
.
.SH PRO TIPS
.
.IP \(bu 2n
.
If you build a package and then choose not to install it,
the built package file will still be moved to the cache.
You can then install it whenever you want with
.BR \-C .
.
.IP \(bu 2n
.
Research packages using
.BR \-Ad \ ( \-\-deps ),
.BR \-Ai \ ( \-\-info )
and
.BR \-Ap \ ( \-\-pkgbuild )!
.
.IP \(bu 2n
.
When upgrading, use
.B \-Akua
instead of just
.BR \-Au .
.
This will remove make deps, as well as show PKGBUILD diffs before building.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR aura.conf (5),
.BR pacman (8),
.BR pacman.conf (5),
.BR makepkg (8)
.
.SH BUGS
.
It is not recommended to install non-AUR packages with pacman or aura.
.
Aura will assume they are AUR packages during a
.B \-Au
and attempt to upgrade them.
.
If a name collision occurs (that is, if there is a legitimate AUR package with
the same name as the one you installed) previous installations could be
overwritten.
.
.SH AUTHOR
.
Colin Woodbury <colin@fosskers.ca>
.
.SH CONTRIBUTORS
.
.TS \" Tab-separated
l .
Chris Warrick
Brayden Banks
Denis Kasak
Edwin Marshall
Jimmy Brisson
Kyle Raftogianis
Nicholas Clarke
.TE
.
.SH TRANSLATORS
.
.TS \" Tab-separated
c l .
Polish	Chris Warrick and Michał Kurek
Croatian	Denis Kasak and "stranac"
Swedish	Fredrik Haikarainen and Daniel Beecham
German	Lukas Niederbremer
Spanish	Alejandro Gómez, Sergio Conde, and Max Ferrer
Portuguese	Henry Kupty, Thiago Perrotta, and Wagner Amaral
French	Ma Jiehong and Fabien Dubosson
Russian	Kyrylo Silin and Alexey Kotlyarov
Italian	Bob Valantin and Cristian Tentella
Serbian	Filip Brcic
Norwegian	"chinatsun"
Indonesian	"pak tua Greg"
Chinese	Kai Zhang
Japanese	Onoue Takuro and Colin Woodbury
Esperanto	Zachary Matthews
Dutch	Joris Blanken
Turkish	Cihan Alkan
Arabic	"Array in a Matrix"
Ukrainian	Andriy Cherniy
.TE
