.\" Man page for `aura.conf`
.\" Written by Colin Woodbury <colin@fosskers.ca>
.
.TH aura.conf 5 "2021 January" "Aura" "Aura Manual"
.
.de SAMPLE      \" Indented example - on its own paragraph.
.  P
.  RS
.  EX
..
.de ESAMPLE     \" End of Indented example.
.  EE
.  RE
..
.de RSAMPLE     \" Relative sample - even more indented example.
.  RS
.  SAMPLE
..
.de ERSAMPLE    \" End of Relative sample.
.  ESAMPLE
.  RE
..
.
.SH NAME
aura.conf \- aura package manager configuration file
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
/etc/aura.conf
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Aura can be configured at runtime by commandline flags, but for users who use
the same options all the time (say, build paths or language flags) this can be
verbose. \fIaura.conf\fR lets you make these common settings permanent.
.
.SH EXAMPLE
.SAMPLE
# --- Language --- #
language = en  # English.

# --- Build Settings --- #
user = <you>
buildpath = /tmp
vcspath = /var/cache/aura/vcs

# --- Misc. --- #
editor = vi
.ESAMPLE
.
.SH OPTIONS
.B language
.RS 4
Aura can be used in different human languages. This field must be a 2-letter
language code, similar to those used in LOCALE. The available codes are:
.
.SAMPLE
|------+------------|
| Code | Language   |
|------+------------|
| nl   | Dutch      |
| en   | English    |
| de   | German     |
| nb   | Norwegian  |
| sv   | Swedish    |
|------+------------|
| fr   | French     |
| it   | Italian    |
| pt   | Portuguese |
| es   | Spanish    |
|------+------------|
| hr   | Croatian   |
| pl   | Polish     |
| ru   | Russian    |
| sr   | Serbian    |
|------+------------|
| zh   | Chinese    |
| id   | Indonesian |
| ja   | Japanese   |
|------+------------|
| eo   | Esperanto  |
|------+------------|
.ESAMPLE
.RE
.
.P
.B user
.RS 4
The real, non-sudo user to build packages as.
.RE
.
.P
.B buildpath
.RS 4
The location on the filesystem in which to build packages.
.RE
.
.P
.B allsourcepath
.RS 4
The location on the filesystem in which to save "source packages" built with
\fI\-\-allsource\fR.
.RE
.
.P
.B vcspath
.RS 4
The location on the filesystem in which to store the cloned repositories of
\fI*-git\fR, etc., packages.
.RE
.
.P
.B analyse
.RS 4
Aura automatically scans PKGBUILDs for malicious bash usage and other "bad
practices". Set this to \fIFalse\fR to turn this off.
.RE
.
.P
.B editor
.RS 4
The editor to use during \fI\-\-hotedit\fR.
.RE
.
.SH SEE ALSO
aura(8)
.
.SH AUTHOR
Colin Woodbury <colin@fosskers.ca>
